Ping to Win? Non-Verbal Communication and Team
Performance in Competitive Online Multiplayer Games
Alex Leavitt,1Brian C. Keegan,2Joshua Clark1
1University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
2Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
aleavitt@usc.edu, bkeegan@acm.org, joshuaac@usc.edu
ABSTRACT
Non-verbal communication plays a large role in online com-
petitive multiplayer games, as team members attempt to coor-
dinate with each other without distraction to achieve victory.
Some games enable this communication through “pings,”
alerts that are easy to activate and provide auditory and visual
cues for teammates. In this paper, we review the literature
on gestures and non-verbal communication and, through an
empirical analysis of 84,489 players across 10,293 matches
in the popular game, League of Legends, illustrate ping use
in multiplayer games and test the impact of ping actions on
performance in teams. We show that the amount of pings de-
pends on player role and in-game activity and that pings by
players have a positive but concave relationship with player
performance. These ﬁndings demonstrate the importance of
non-verbal communication and interruption on the perfor-
mance of virtual team members. We conclude by discussing
the implications of these results for theorizing and designing
sociotechnical systems that rely on users to engage in syn-
chronous, collaborative work in shared visual spaces.
Author Keywords
Alerts; pings; non-verbal communication; interruptions;
awareness; online games; MOBA; virtual teams;
coordination; performance; League of Legends; e-sports
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3 Information Interfaces and Presentation: Group and
Organization Interfaces (collaborative computing, computer
supported cooperative work; synchronous interaction); K.8.0
Computers and Society: General (Games)
INTRODUCTION
How well do teams perform on high-tempo tasks within
collaborative virtual environments without rich, face-to-face
communication? Human-computer interaction research has
explored this question for more than two decades across a va-
riety of contexts and technologies [18, 26]. Online sociotech-
nical systems now provide a substantial opportunity for social
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI’16 , May 07–12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA.
Copyright © 2016 ACM 978-1-4503-3362-7/16/05...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858132scientists to test and develop new theories of organizational
behavior. While sports have been used as a setting to study
coordination and communication [16, 24], cooperative on-
line games — for example, League of Legends — provide
unique circumstances to test theories about virtual team per-
formance, because they provide rich behavioral data in high-
tempo settings with consistent rules.
Following recent calls to analyze how communication tools
inﬂuence virtual team coordination [72], our study examines
the role of non-verbal, communicative alerts called “pings”
and their impact on performance in the popular multiplayer
online battle arena (MOBA) game, League of Legends (LoL ).
In this game, two ﬁve-member teams attempt to destroy the
opposing team’s base while protecting their own. Players
must not only perform specialized roles with precise skill,
but they must also quickly process complex streams of infor-
mation in a shared visual environment and coordinate team
members’ behavior to respond to opponents’ play. Commu-
nication plays a crucial role in this work, but the rapid pace
of the game and ad hoc nature of teams precludes the ability
to maintain consistent communication through text or voice
chat. While pings provide players with the affordance of
quick, targeted communication, team members need to bal-
ance using alerts to improve situational awareness for team
members with interrupting teammates’ ﬂow, disrupting focus,
or overloading their attention.
In this paper, we draw on scholarship about the role of ges-
ture and non-verbal cues in collaborative work, the dynamics
of teams in multiplayer online games, and awareness and in-
terruption in collaborative environments to develop and eval-
uate an empirical model of team communication and perfor-
mance. We test this model by analyzing a dataset contain-
ing actions from 84,489 League of Legends players in 10,293
games (comprised of 102,930 individual game sessions). Us-
ing hierarchical regression analyses to control for player-,
team-, and game-level performance, we ﬁnd evidence of vari-
ation in use of pings by types and amount of participation; a
positive relationship of ping use on some kinds of individual-
level performance; and relationship between pings and low-
ered performance from interruption. These ﬁndings connect
emerging research about team behavior in multiplayer online
games with theories from linguistics, organizational behavior,
and human-computer interaction, and furthermore they have
implications for designing collaborative systems to support
virtual teamwork.
Supporting Player Social Experiences
#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA
4337
