148Drusilla Modjeska, Exiles at Home: Australian Women Writers 1925-1945
Angus and Robertson, Sirius Books, Sydney 1981.
Reviewed by Leigh Burrows
Drusilla Modjeska’s book takes a relatively unproblematic approach to questions con-
cerning the mediations of literature and history, gender and national identities. While I
respect her efforts to rediscover the work of forgotten women writers of the period
1925-1945 in Australia, we need still to seriously consider the implications of unqualif-
ied support for ’novelists’ who are ’female’, ’Australian’ and who wrote between the
wars.
Nonetheless, her support and her enthusiasm for these women writers will inspire many
readers of her book and lead them, perhaps, to seek the literature out for themselves,
getting some idea of the writers’ lives, background and associations. Many of the novels
introduced by Drusilla Modjeska have been lately re-issued, and new questions will be
raised, since her research, on the cultural history of the period and the women writing in
it and their art. She has succeeded then, in her campaign for Australian women’s writing,
as Nettie Palmer did earlier in her campaign on behalf of Australian writers of both sexes
around the time of the thirties.
Nettie Palmer dreamt of a &dquo;flowering&dquo; of Australian literature when it was the &dquo;Tasman-
ian poor-relation&dquo;1 to the Great Tradition in English literature, a dream lately echoed by
Judith Brett, editor of Meanjin that literary journal in the Australian tradition. Interest-
ingly, both women saw their role as one of listening and encouraging, helpfully criticiz-
ing and supporting - the one a literary critic, the other a literary editor.
Drusilla Modjeska commends Nettie Palmer for her commitment to the development of
a &dquo;progressive and national literature&dquo;,2 for her encouragement and promotion of
Australian literature when it was not even studied in our universities, let alone outside
Australia. The support of a national culture is not problematised by Drusilla Modjeska;
rather she takes its desirability as given, endorsing even Jack Lindsay’s article on
Katharine Susannah Prichard as a &dquo;still leading critical assessment of her work&dquo;. She
quotes his lines: &dquo;(she) builds on the Australian tradition, on the best elements that have
come out of the pioneering days....&dquo;3
This, in a book specializing on the work of women writers, demonstrates a certain one-
dimensional approach to the nature of women’s relationship to history, language and
men.
Unlike Drusilla Modjeska, neither Nettie Palmer or Judith Brett admitted to particularly
supporting the work of women writers ... they had a more ’humanitarian’ cause. How-
ever, as Agnes Heller has remarked: &dquo;The identification with womankind as against man-
kind means the loss of identity with humanity and the identification with humanity
without the specification of gender identity is the loss of female identity.&dquo;4
Self-consciousness about the gender position assigned to us biologically and socially is
cornplex - more so, some would argue, than the self-consciousness of national identity.
In her paper on the nature of literary journals in Australia,5 Judith Brett, however,
elevated this consideration to one of importance in -a psychoanalytic framework about
Australians’ particular relationship to language. As I have already noted she sees her role
as one of supporting Australian writers and helping to provide a safe space for their
creativity to develop. Just as the parent helps the child ’enter’ language since it is seen as
 at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 20, 2015 the.sagepub.com Downloaded from 
